{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1030{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 CONSTITUTION \line OF THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON  \line Adopted on 18 January 1996, amendment to the Constitution of 2 June 1972 \par
PREAMBLE \par
We, the people of Cameroon, \line Proud of our linguistic and cultural diversity, an enriching feature of our national identity, but profoundly aware of the imperative need to further consolidate our unity, solemnly declare that we constitute one and the same Nation, bound by the, same destiny, and assert our firm, determination to build the Cameroonian Fatherland on the basis of the ideals of fraternity, justice and progress;  \line Jealous of our hard-won independence and resolved to preserve same; convinced that the salvation of Africa lies in forging ever-growing bonds of solidarity among African Peoples, affirm our desire to contribute to the advent of a united and free Africa, while maintaining peaceful and brotherly relations with the other nations of the World, in accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;  \line Resolved to harness our natural resources in order to ensure the well-being of every citizen without discrimination, by raising living standards, proclaim our right to development as well as our determination to devote all our efforts to that end and declare our readiness to co-operate with all States desirous of participating in this national endeavour with due respect for our sovereignty and the independence of the Cameroonian State.  \par
We, people of Cameroon, \line Declare that the human person, without distinction as to race, religion, sex or belief, possesses inalienable and sacred rights;  \line Affirm our attachment to the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Charter of the United Nations and The African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, and all duly ratified international conventions relating thereto, in particular, to the following principles:  \line - all persons shall have equal rights and obligations. The State shall provide all its citizens with the conditions necessary for their development; \line - the State shall ensure the protection of minorities and shall preserve the rights of indigenous populations in accordance with the law; \line - freedom and security shall be guaranteed to each individual, subject to respect for the rights of others and the higher interests of the State;  \line - every person shall have the right to settle in any place and to move about freely, subject to the statutory provisions concerning public law and order, security and tranquillity;  \line - the home is inviolate. No search may be conducted except by virtue of the law;  \line - the privacy of all correspondence is inviolate. No interference may be allowed except by virtue of decisions emanating from the Judicial Power;  \line - no person may be compelled to do what the law does not prescribe;  \line - no person may be prosecuted, arrested or detained except in the cases and according to the manner determined by law;  \line - the law may not have retrospective effect. No person may be judged and punished, except by virtue of a law enacted and published before the offence committed;  \line - The law shall ensure the right of every person to a fair hearing before the courts;  \line - every accused person is presumed innocent until found guilty during a hearing conducted in strict compliance with the rights of defence;  \line - every person has a right to life, to physical and moral integrity and to humane treatment in all circumstances. Under no circumstances shall any person be subjected to torture, to cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment;  \line - no person shall be harassed on grounds of his origin, religious, philosophical or political opinions or beliefs, subject to respect for public policy;  \line - the State shall be secular. The neutrality and independence of the State in respect of all religions shall be guaranteed;  \line - freedom of religion and worship shall be guaranteed;  \line - the freedom of communication, of expression, of the press, of assembly, of association, and of trade unionism, as well as the right to strike shall be guaranteed under the conditions fixed by law;  \line - the Nation shall protect and promote the family which is the natural foundation of human society. It shall protect women, the young, the elderly and the disabled;  \line - the State shall guarantee the child's right to education. Primary education shall be compulsory. The organization and supervision of education at all levels shall be the bounden duty of the State;  \line - ownership shall mean the right guaranteed to every person by law to use, enjoy and dispose of property. No person shall be deprived thereof, save for public purposes and subject to the payment of compensation under conditions determined by law;  \line - the right of ownership may not be exercised in violation of the public interest or in such a way as to be prejudicial to the security, freedom, existence or property of other persons;  \line - every person shall have a right to a healthy environment. The protection of the environment shall be the duty of every citizen. The State shall ensure the protection and improvement of the environment;  \line - every person shall have the right and the obligation to work;  \line - every person shall share in the burden of public expenditure according to his financial resources;  - all citizens shall contribute to the defence of the Fatherland:  \line - the State shall guarantee all citizens of either sex the rights and freedoms set forth in the Preamble of the Constitution.  \par
PART I \line The State and Sovereignty \par
Article 1 \line (1) The United Republic of Cameroon shall, with effect from the date of entry into force of this law, be known as Republic of Cameroon (Law No 84-1 of 4 February 1984).  \line (2) The Republic of Cameroon shall be a decentralized unitary State.  \line It shall be one and indivisible, secular, democratic and dedicated to social service.\line It shall recognize and protect traditional values that conform to democratic principles, human rights and the law.  \line It shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the law.  \line (3) The official languages of the, Republic of Cameroon shall be English and French, both languages having the same status. The State shall guarantee the promotion of bilingualism throughout the country. It shall endeavour to protect and promote national languages.  \line (4) Its motto shall be " Peace-Work-Fatherland".  \line (5) Its flag shall be three equal vertical stripes of green, red and yellow charged with one gold star in the centre of the red stripe.  \line (6) Its national anthem shall be "O Cameroon, Cradle of our Forefathers".  \line (7) The seal of the Republic of Cameroon shall be a circular medallion in bas-relief, 46 millimetres in diameter, bearing on the obverse and in the centre the head of girl in profile turned to the dexter towards a coffee branch with two leaves and flanked on the sinister by five cocoa pods, with the French words "Republique du Cameroun" inscribed below the upper edge and the national motto "Paix-Travail-Patrie" inscribed above the lower edge; on the reverse and in the centre the coat of arms of the Republic of Cameroon, with the English words " Republic of Cameroon " inscribed beneath the upper edge and the national motto " Peace-Work-Fatherland " inscribed above the lower edge.  The coat of arms of the Republic of Cameroon shall be an escutcheon surmounted chief by the legend "Republic of Cameroon" and supported by two crossed fasces with the motto " Peace-Work-Fatherland " base.  \line The escutcheon shall be composed of a star on a field vent and triangle gules, charged with the geographical outline of Cameroon azure, and surcharged with the sword and scales of justice sable.  (8) The Capital of the Republic of Cameroon shall be Yaounde.  \par
Article 2 \line (1) National sovereignty shall be vested in the people of Cameroon who shall exercise same either through the President of the Republic and Members of Parliament or by way of referendum. No section of the people or any individual shall arrogate to itself or to himself the exercise thereof.  \line (2) The authorities responsible for the management of the State shall derive their powers from the people through election by direct or indirect universal suffrage, unless otherwise provided for in this Constitution.  \line (3) The vote shall be equal and secret, and every citizen aged twenty years and above shall be entitled to vote  \par
Article 3 \line Political parties and groups shall help the electorate in the making of voting decisions. They shall be bound to respect the principles of democracy, national sovereignty and unity. They shall be formed and shall exercise their, activities in accordance with the law.  \par
Article 4 \line State power shall be exercised by:  \line - The President of the Republic;  \line - Parliament.  \par
PART II \line Executive Power \par
CHAPTER 1 The President of the Republic \par
Article 5 \line (1) The President of the Republic shall be the Head Of State. \line (2) Elected by the whole Nation, he shall be the symbol of national unity. \line He shall define the policy of the nation.  \line He shall ensure respect for the Constitution.  \line He shall, through his arbitration, ensure the proper functioning of public authorities.  \line He shall be the guarantor of the independence of the Nation and of its territorial integrity, of the permanency and continuity of the State and of the respect of international treaties and agreements.  \par
Article 6 \line (1) The President of the Republic shall be elected by a majority of the votes cast through direct, equal and secret universal suffrage. \line (2) The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term of office of 7 (seven) years. He shall be eligible for re-election once.  \line (3) The election shall be held not less than 20 (twenty) days and not more than 50, (fifty) days before the expiry of the term of the President of the Republic in office.  \line (4) Where the office of President of the Republic becomes vacant as a result of death, resignation or permanent incapacity duly ascertained by the Constitutional Council, the polls for the election of the new President of the Republic must be held not less than 20 (twenty) days and not, more than 40 (forty) days after the office becomes vacant.  \line (a) The President of the Senate shall as of fight. act as interim President of the Republic until the new President of the Republic is elected. Where the President of the Senate is unable to exercise these powers, the shall be exercised by his Vice, following the order of precedence.  \line (b) The interim President of the Republic - the President of the senate or his Vice - may neither amend the Constitution nor the composition of the Government. He may not organize a referendum or run for the office of President of the Republic.  \line (5) Candidates for the office of President of the Republic must be Cameroonian by birth, enjoy their civic and political rights and must have attained the age of 35 (thirty-five) by the date of the election.  \line (6) the conditions for electing the President of the Republic shall be laid down by law.  \par
Article 7 \line (1) The president-elect shall assume office once he has been sworn in.  \line (2) He shall take the oath of office before the Cameroonian people, in the presence of the members of Parliament, the Constitutional Council and the Supreme Court meeting in solemn session.  \line He shall be sworn in by the President of the National Assembly.  \line (3) The wording of the oath and the procedure for implementing the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall be laid down by law.  \line (4) The office of President of the Republic shall be incompatible with any other elective public office or professional activity.  \par
Article 8 \line (1) The President of the Republic shall represent the State in all acts of public life.  \line (2) He shall be Head of the Armed Forces.  \line (3) He shall ensure the internal and external security of the Republic.  \line (4) He shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers. The ambassadors and envoys extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him.  \line (5) The President of the Republic shall enact laws as provided for in Article 31 below.  \line (6) The President of the Republic shall refer matters to the Constitutional Council under the conditions laid down by the Constitution.  \line (7) He shall exercise the right of clemency after consultation with the Higher Judicial Council.  \line (8) He shall exercise statutory authority.  \line (9) He shall set up and organize the administrative services of the State.  \line (10) He shall appoint to civil and military posts of the State.  \line (11) He shall confer the decorations and honorary distinctions of the Republic.  \line (12) The President of the Republic may, if necessary and after consultation with the Government, the Bureaux of the National Assembly and the Senate, dissolve the National Assembly. The election of a new Assembly shall take place in accordance with the provisions of Article 15 (4)  \par
Article 9 \line (1) 'The President of the Republic may, where circumstances so warrant, declare by decree a state of emergency which shall confer upon him such special powers as may be provided for by law. \line (2) In the event of a serious threat to the nation's territorial integrity or to its existence, its independence or institutions, the President of the Republic may declare a state of siege by decree and take any measures as he may deem necessary. He shall inform the Nation of his decision by message.  \par
Article 10 \line (1) The President of the Republic shall appoint the Prime Minister and, on the proposal of the latter, the other members of Government.  \line He shall define their duties.  \line He shall terminate their appointment.  \line He shall preside over the Council of Ministers.  \line (2) The President of the Republic may delegate some of his powers to the Prime Minister, other members of Government and any other senior administrative officials of the State, within the framework of their respective duties.  \line (3) Where the President of the Republic is temporarily unable to, perform his duties, he shall delegate the Prime Minister and, should the latter also be unavailable, any other member of Government to discharge his duties within the framework of an express delegation of some of his powers.  \par
CHAPTER 2 The Government \par
Article 11 \par
The Government shall implement the policy of the nation as defined by the President of the Republic.  \par
It shall be responsible to the National Assembly under the conditions and procedures provided for in \par
Article 34 below.  \par
Article 12 \par
(1) The Prime Minister shall be the Head of Government and shall direct its action.  \par
(2) He shall be responsible for the enforcement of the laws.  \par
(3) He shall exercise statutory authority and appoint to civil posts, subject to the prerogatives of the \par
President of the Republic in such areas.  \par
(4) He shall direct all the government services required for the accomplishment of his duties.  \par
(5) He may delegate some of his powers to members of Government and to senior State officials.  \par
Article 13 \par
The office of member of Government and any office ranking as such shall be incompatible with that of \par
member of Parliament, Chairman of the Executive or Assembly of a local or regional authority, leader of a \par
national professional association, or with any other employment or professional activity.  \par
PART III \par
Legislative Power \par
Article 14 \par
(1) Legislative power shall be exercised by the Parliament which shall comprise 2 (two) Houses:  \par
(a) The National Assembly;  \par
(b) The Senate.  \par
(2) Parliament shall legislate and control Government action.  \par
(3) Both Houses of Parliament shall meet on the same dates:  \par
(a) in ordinary session during the months of June, November and March each year, when convened by \par
the Bureaux of the National Assembly and the Senate after consultation with the President of the \par
Republic;  \par
(b) in extraordinary session, at the request of the President of the Republic or of one-third of the members \par
of both Houses.  \par
However, the two Houses shall be convened simultaneously only if the business of the day concerns both \par
of them.  \par
(4) The two Houses of Parliament shall meet in congress at the request of the President of the Republic \par
in order to:  - be addressed by or receive a message from the President of the Republic ;  - receive the oath of members of the Constitutional Council;  - take a decision on a draft or proposed constitutional amendment.  \par
When Parliament meets in congress, the Bureau of the National Assembly shall preside over the \par
proceedings.  \par
(5) No person, shall be member of both the National Assembly and the Senate.  \par
(6) The conditions for the election of members of the National Assembly and of the Senate, as well as the \par
immunities, ineligibilities, incompatibilities, allowances and privileges of the members of Parliament shall \par
be determined by law.  \par
CHAPTER 1 The National Assembly \par
Article 15 \par
(1) The National Assembly shall comprise 180 (one hundred and eighty) members elected by direct and \par
secret universal suffrage for a five-year term of office.  \par
The number of members of the National Assembly may be modified by law.  \par
(2) Each member of the National Assembly shall represent the entire Nation.  \par
(3) Any imposed mandate shall be null and void.  \par
(4) In case of serious crisis, the President of the Republic may, after consultation with the President of the \par
Constitutional Council and Bureaux of the National Assembly to decide, by a law, to extend or abridge its \par
term of office. In this case, the election of a new Assembly shall take place not less than 40 (forty) days \par
and not more than 60 (sixty) days following the expiry of the extension or abridgement period.  \par
Article 16 \par
(1) At the beginning of each legislative year, the National Assembly shall meet as of right in ordinary \par
session under the conditions laid down by law.  \par
(2) Each year, the National Assembly shall hold 3 (three) ordinary sessions, each lasting not more than \par
30 (thirty) days.  \par
(a) At the opening of its first ordinary session, the National Assembly shall elect its President and Bureau \par
members.  \par
(b) The National Assembly shall, during one of its sessions, adopt the State budget. Where such budget \par
is not adopted before the end of the current financial year, the President of the Republic shall be \par
empowered to extend the previous budget by one-twelfth until a new one is passed.  \par
(3) The National Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session for not more than 15 (fifteen) days on a \par
specific agenda and at the request of the President of the Republic or of one-third of its members.  \par
The extraordinary session shall wind up as soon as the agenda for which it was convened is exhausted.  \par
Article 17 \par
(1) Sittings of the National Assembly shall be public. Exceptionally, the National Assembly may hold \par
sittings in camera at the request of the President of the Republic or of an absolute majority of its \par
members.  \par
(2) The National Assembly shall, in a law, draw up its standing orders.  \par
Article 18 \par
(1) The agenda of the National Assembly shall be drawn up by the Chairmen's conference.  \par
(2) The Chairmen's conference shall be composed of Presidents of Parliamentary Groups, Chairmen of \par
Committees and members of the Bureau of the National Assembly. A member of Government shall \par
participate in the conference meeting.  \par
(3) Only bills falling within its area of jurisdiction by virtue of Article 26 below may be included in the \par
agenda of the National Assembly.  \par
(a) All private members' bills and amendments which, if passed, would result in the reduction of public \par
funds or in an increase of public charges without a corresponding reduction in other expenditure or the \par
grant of equivalent new supply of funds, shall be inadmissible.  \par
(b) Any doubt or dispute on the admissibility of a bill shall be referred by the President of the Republic, the \par
President of the National Assembly or by one-third of the members of the National Assembly to the \par
Constitutional Council for a ruling.  \par
(4) The agenda shall give priority, and in the order decided by the Government, to the consideration of the \par
government bills and private members' bills accepted by it. The other private members' bills admitted by \par
the Chairmen's Conference shall be considered subsequently.  \par
Where a private members' bill has not been considered during two successive ordinary sessions, it shall \par
automatically be considered at the very next ordinary session.  \par
(5) Any item on the agenda shall, at the request of the Government, be treated as a matter of urgency.  \par
Article 19 \par
(1) Laws shall be passed by a simple majority of the members of the National Assembly.  \par
(2) Bills submitted to the National Assembly for reconsideration by the Senate shall either be passed or, \par
rejected in accordance with Article 30 below.  \par
(3) The President of the Republic may, before enacting any law, ask for a second reading. In such case, \par
bills shall be passed by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly.  \par
CHAPTER 2 The Senate \par
Article 20 \par
(1) The Senate shall represent the regional and local authorities.  \par
(2) Each region shall be represented in the Senate by 10 (ten) Senators of whom 7 (seven) shall be \par
elected by indirect universal suffrage on a regional basis and 3 (three) appointed by the President of the \par
Republic.  \par
(3) Candidates for the post of Senator and personalities appointed to the post of Senator by the President \par
of the Republic must have attained the age of 40 (forty) by the date of the election or appointment.  \par
(4) Senators shall serve a term of 5 (five) years.  \par
Article 21 \par
(1) At the beginning of each legislative year, the Senate shall meet as of right in ordinary session under \par
the conditions laid down by law.  \par
(2) Each year, the Senate shall hold 3 (three) ordinary sessions, each lasting not more than 30 (thirty) \par
days.  \par
At the opening of its first ordinary session, the Senate shall elect its President and Bureau members.  \par
(3) The Senate shall meet in extraordinary session for not more than 15 (fifteen) days on a specific \par
agenda and at the request of the President of the Republic or of one-third of its members.  \par
The extraordinary session shall wind up as soon as the agenda for which it was convened is exhausted.  \par
Article 22 \par
(1) Sittings of the Senate shall be public. Exceptionally, the Senate may hold sittings in camera at the \par
request of the President of the Republic or of an absolute majority of its members.  \par
(2) The Senate shall, in a law, draw up its standing orders.  \par
Article 23 \par
(1) The agenda of the Senate shall be drawn up by the Chairmen's conference.  \par
(2) The Chairmen's conference shall be composed of Presidents of Parliamentary Groups, Chairmen of \par
Committees and members of the Bureau of the Senate. A member of Government shall participate in the \par
conference meeting.  \par
(3) Only bills falling with in its area of jurisdiction by virtue of Article 26 below may be included in the \par
agenda of the Senate.  \par
(a) All private members' bills and amendments which, if passed, would result in the reduction of public \par
funds or in an increase of public charges without a corresponding reduction in other expenditure or the \par
grant of equivalent new supply of funds, shall be inadmissible.  \par
(b) Any doubt or dispute on the admissibility of a bill shall be referred by the President of the Republic, the \par
President of the Senate or one-third of the Senators to the Constitutional Council for a ruling.  \par
(4) The agenda shall give priority, and in the order decided by the Government, to the consideration of the \par
government bills and private members' bills accepted by it. The other private members' bills admitted by \par
the Chairmen's Conference shall be considered subsequently.  \par
Where a private members' bill has not been considered during two successive ordinary sessions, it shall \par
automatically be considered at the very next ordinary session.  \par
(5) Any item on the agenda shall, at the request of the Government, be treated as a matter of urgency.  \par
Article 24 \par
(1) Laws shall be passed by a simple majority of the Senators.  \par
(2) The Senate may amend or reject all or part of a bill submitted to it for consideration, in accordance \par
with Article 30 below.  \par
(3) The President of the Republic may, before enacting a law, ask for a second reading  \par
In such case, bills shall be passed by an absolute majority of the Senators.  \par
PART IV \par
Relations Between the Executive and Legislative Powers \par
Article 25 \par
Bills may be tabled either by the President of the Republic or by members of parliament.  \par
Article 26 \par
(1) Bills shall be passed by Parliament.  \par
(2) The following shall be reserved to the Legislative Power:  \par
(a) The fundamental rights, guarantees and obligations of the citizen:  \par
1. safeguarding individual freedom and security;  \par
2. the rules governing public freedoms;  \par
3. labour legislation, trade union legislation, rules governing social security and insurance;  \par
4. the duties and obligations of the citizen in respect of national defence requirement&.  \par
(b) The status of persons and property ownership system:  \par
1. nationality, status of persons, matrimonial system, succession and gifts;  \par
2. rules governing civil and commercial obligations;  \par
3. movable and immovable property ownership system.  \par
(c) The political, administrative and judicial organization:  \par
1. rules governing election of the President of the Republic and elections into the National Assembly, the \par
Senate, Regional and Local Bodies and referendum operations;  \par
2. rules governing associations and political parties;  \par
3. the organization, functioning, powers and resources of regional and local authorities;  \par
4. general rules governing the organization of national defence;  \par
5. judicial organization and the creation of various types of courts;  \par
6. the definition of felonies and misdemeanours and the institution of penalties of all kinds, criminal \par
procedure, civil procedure, measures of execution, amnesty.  \par
(d) The following financial and patrimonial matters:  \par
1. rules governing the issue of currency;  \par
2. the budget;  \par
3. the creation of duties and the determination of their basis of assessment, rates and methods of \par
collection;  \par
4. land tenure, State lands and mining;  \par
5. natural resources.  \par
(e) Programming the objectives of economic and social action.  \par
(f) The system of education.  \par
Article 27 \par
Matters not reserved to the legislative power shall come under the jurisdiction of the authority empowered \par
to issue rules and regulations.  \par
Article 28 \par
(1) However, with regard to the subjects listed in Article 26 (2) above, Parliament may empower the \par
President of the Republic to legislate by way of ordinance for a limited period and for given purposes.  \par
(2) Such ordinances shall enter into force on the date of their publication. They shall be tabled before the \par
bureaux of the National Assembly and the Senate for purposes of ratification within the time-limit laid \par
down by the enabling law. They shall be of a statutory nature as long as they have not been ratified.  \par
(3) They shall remain in force as long as Parliament has not refused to ratify them.  \par
Article 29 \par
(1) Government bills and private members' bills shall be tabled at the same toe before the bureaux of the \par
National Assembly and the Senate. They shall be studied by the appropriate committees prior to their \par
being debated in plenary session.  \par
(2) The bill debated in plenary session shall be that tabled by the President of the Republic. The private \par
members bill debated in plenary session shall be the next tabled by its author or authors.  \par
(3) Such bills may be amended in the course of the debate.  \par
Article 30 \par
(1) A bill passed by the National Assembly shall be immediately forwarded to the President of the Senate \par
by the President of the National Assembly.  \par
(2) The President of the Senate shall, upon receiving the bill forwarded by the President of National \par
Assembly, submit it to the Senate for consideration.  \par
(3) Within 10 (ton) days, with effect from the date of receipt of the bill or 5(five) days for a bill declared \par
urgent by the Government, the Senate may:  \par
(a) Pass the bill.  \par
In which case, the President of the Senate shall return the adopted bill to the President of the National \par
Assembly who shall forward same within 48 (forty-eight) hours to the President of the Republic for \par
enactment.  \par
(b) Amend the bill.  \par
Such amendment must be approved by a simple majority of the Senators.  \par
In which case, the amended bill shall be returned to the National Assembly by the President of the Senate \par
for reconsideration.  \par
The amendment proposed by the Senate shall be passed or rejected by a simple majority of the members \par
of the National Assembly.  \par
The final bill adopted shall be forwarded by the President of the National Assembly to the President of the \par
Republic for enactment.  \par
(c) Reject all or part of the bill.  \par
Such rejection must be approved by an absolute majority of the senators.  \par
In which case, the rejected bill with reasons therefor shall be returned to the National Assembly by the \par
President of the Senate for reconsideration.  \par
1. The National Assembly shall, after deliberations, pass the bill by absolute majority of its members.  \par
The final bill adopted by the National Assembly shall be forwarded to the President of the Republic for \par
enactment.  \par
2. Where an absolute majority cannot be reached, the President of the Republic may convene a meeting \par
of a joint commission comprising equal representation of both houses to propose a common formulation \par
of the provisions rejected by the Senate.  \par
The text prepared by the joint commission shall be submitted to both Houses by the President of the \par
Republic for approval.  \par
No amendment shall be admissible, except with the approval of the President of the Republic.  \par
Where the joint commission falls to agree on a common text, or where such text is not adopted by both \par
Houses, the President of the Republic may:  - either request the National Assembly to take a final decision thereon; or  - declare the government bill or private members' bill null and void.  \par
Article 31 \par
(1) The President of the Republic shall enact laws passed by Parliament within 15 (fifteen) days of their \par
being forwarded to him unless he requests a second reading or refers the matter to the Constitutional \par
Council.  \par
(2) Upon the expiry of this deadline, and after establishing the failure of the President of the Republic to \par
act, the President of the National Assembly may himself enact the law.  \par
(3) Laws shall be published in the Official Gazette of the Republic in English and French.  \par
Article 32 \par
The President of Republic may, at his request, address the National Assembly, the Senate or the two \par
Houses meeting in congress. He may also send messages to them; but no such address or message \par
may be debated in his presence.  \par
Article 33 \par
The Prime Minister and the other members of Government shall have access to Parliament and may \par
participate in its deliberations.  \par
Article 34 \par
(1) At the session during which the finance bill is considered, the Prime Minister shall present to the \par
National Assembly the Government's economic, financial, social and cultural programme.  \par
(2) The Prime Minister may, after the deliberations of the Council of Ministers, commit the responsibility of \par
the Government before the National Assembly on a programme or, as the case may be, on a general \par
policy statement.  \par
Voting shall take place not less than 48 (forty-eight) hours after the vote of no confidence has been \par
requested.  \par
A vote of no confidence shall be passed by an absolute majority of the members of the National \par
Assembly.  \par
Only votes against a vote of confidence shall be counted.  \par
(2) The National Assembly may question the responsibility of the Government through a motion of \par
censure. Such motion may be admissible only when it is signed by at last one-third of the members of the \par
National Assembly. Voting shall take place not less than 48 (forty-eight) hours after the motion has been \par
tabled. A motion of censure shall be passed by a two third majority of the members of the National \par
Assembly. Only votes in favour of a motion of censure shall be counted.  \par
Where a motion of censure is rejected, its signatories may not propose a new motion before a period of \par
one year except as provided for in paragraph (4) below.  \par
(4) The Prime Minister may, after the deliberations of the Council of Ministers, commit the responsibility of \par
the Government before the National Assembly on the adoption of a bill. In such case, the bill may be \par
considered adopted, except where a motion of censure tabled within the next 24 (twenty-four) hours is \par
passed under the conditions provided for in the preceding paragraph.  \par
(5) Where the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure or passes a vote of no confidence, the \par
Prime Minister shall tender the resignation of the Government to the President of the Republic.  \par
(6) The President of the Republic may re-appoint the Prime Minister and ask him to form a new \par
Government.  \par
Article 35 \par
(1) The Parliament shall control Government action through oral or written questions and by setting up \par
committees of inquiry with specific terms of reference.  \par
(2) The Government shall, subject to the imperatives of national defence, the security of the State or the \par
secrecy of criminal investigation, furnish any explanations and information to Parliament.  \par
(3) During each ordinary session, a special sitting shall be set aside each week for question time.  \par
Article 36 \par
(1) The President of the Republic may, after consulting with the President of the Constitutional Council, \par
the President of the National Assembly and the President of the Senate, submit to a referendum any \par
reform bill which, although normally reserved to the Legislative Power, could have profound \par
repercussions on the future of the Nation and national. institutions.  \par
This shall apply in particular to:  \par
(a) bills, to organize public authorities or to amend the Constitution;  \par
(b) bills to ratify international agreements or treaties having particularly important consequences;  \par
(c) certain reform bills relating to the law on persons and property.  \par
(2) Such bills shall be adopted by a majority of votes cast.  \par
(3) The referendum procedure shall be laid down by law.  \par
PART V \par
Judicial Power \par
Article 37 \par
(1) Justice shall be administered In the territory of the Republic in the name of the people of Cameroon.  \par
(2) Judicial power shall be exercised by the Supreme Court, Courts of Appeal and Tribunals. The Judicial \par
Power shall be independent of the executive and legislative powers. Magistrates of the bench shall, in the \par
discharge of their duties, be governed only by the law and their conscience:  \par
(3) The President of the Republic shall guarantee the independence of judicial power. He shall appoint \par
members of the bench and for the legal department.  \par
He shall be assisted in this task by the Higher Judicial Council which shall give him its opinion on all \par
nominations for the bench and on disciplinary action against judicial and legal officers. The organization \par
and functioning of the Higher Judicial Council shall be defined by law.  \par
Article 38 \par
(1) The Supreme Court shall be the highest court of the State in legal and administrative matters as Well \par
as in the appraisal of accounts.  \par
(2) It shall comprise:  - a judicial bench;  \par
- an administrative bench;  - an audit bench.  \par
Article 39 \par
The judicial bench shall give final rulings on:  - appeals accepted by law against final rulings given by the various courts and tribunals of the judicial \par
system;  -.judgement's passed, by the lower courts of the judicial system that have become final in cases where \par
the application of the law is challenged,  - all matters expressly devolving upon it by law.  \par
Article 40 \par
The administrative bench shall examine all the administrative disputes Involving the State and other \par
public authorities. It shall:  - examine appeals on regional and council election disputes;  - give final rulings on appeals against final judgements passed by lower courts in cases of administrative \par
disputes;  - examine, any other disputes expressly devolving upon it by law.  \par
Article 41 \par
The audit bench shall be competent to control and rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public \par
and semi-public enterprises.  \par
It shall:  - give final rulings on final judgements passed lower audit courts;  - examine any other matters expressly devolving upon it by law.  \par
Article 42 \par
(1) The organization, functioning, composition and duties of the Supreme Court and the benches it \par
comprises, the conditions for referring matters to them as well as the procedure applicable before them \par
shall be laid down by law.  \par
(2) The organization, functioning, composition and duties of the Courts of Appeal and judicial, \par
administrative and lower audit benches as well as the conditions for referring matters to them and the \par
procedure applicable before them shall be laid down by law.  \par
PART VI \par
Treaties and International Agreements \par
Article 43 \par
The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. Treaties \par
and international agreements failing within the area of competence of the Legislative Power as defined in \par
Article 26 above shall be submitted to Parliament for authorization to ratify.  \par
Article 44 \par
Where the Constitutional Council finds a provision of a treaty or of an international agreement \par
unconstitutional, authorization to ratify and the ratification of the said treaty or agreement shall be \par
deferred until the Constitution is amended.  \par
Article 45 \par
Duly approved or ratified treaties and international agreements shall, following their publication, override \par
national laws, provided the other party implements the said treaty or agreement.  \par
PART VII \par
The Constitutional Council \par
Article 46 \par
The Constitutional Council shall have jurisdiction in matters pertaining to the Constitution. It shall rule on \par
the constitutionality of laws. It shall be the organ regulating the functioning of the institutions.  \par
Article 47 \par
(1) The Constitutional Council shall give a final ruling on:  - the constitutionality of laws, treaties and international agreements;  - the constitutionality of the standing orders of the National Assembly and the Senate 'prior to their \par
implementation;  - conflict of powers between State institutions; between the State and the Regions, and between the \par
Regions.  \par
(2) Matters may be referred to the Constitutional Council by the President of the Republic, the President \par
of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, one-third of the members of the National \par
Assembly or one-third of the Senators.  \par
Presidents of regional executives may refer matters to the Constitutional Council whenever the interests \par
of their Regions are at stake.  \par
(3) Laws as well as treaties and international agreements may, prior to their enactment, be referred to the \par
Constitutional Council by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, the \par
President of the Senate, one-third of. the members of the National Assembly, one-third of the Senators, \par
or the Presidents of regional executives pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (2) above.  \par
Enactment deadlines shall cease to lapse once an instrument has been referred to the Constitutional \par
Council.  \par
(4) The Constitutional Council shall advice in matters falling under its jurisdiction.  \par
Article 48 \par
(1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the regularity of presidential elections, parliamentary elections \par
and referendum operations. It shall proclaim the results thereof.  \par
(2) Any challenges in respect of the regularity of one of the elections provided for in the preceding \par
paragraph may be brought before the Constitutional Council by any candidate, political party that \par
participated in the election in the constituency concerned or any person acting as Government agent at \par
the election.  \par
(3) Any challenges in respect of the regularity of a referendum may be referred to the Constitutional \par
Council by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly the President of the \par
Senate, one-third of the members of the National Assembly or one-third of the Senators.  \par
Article 49 \par
In any case, the Constitutional Council shall give ruling within a period of 15 (fifteen) days once a matter \par
has been referred to it.  \par
However, at the request of the President of the Republic, such time-limit may be reduced to 8 (eight) \par
days.  \par
Article 50 \par
(1) Rulings of the Constitutional Council shall not be subject to appeal. They shall be binding on all public, \par
administrative, military and judicial authorities, as well as, on all natural persons- and corporate bodies.  \par
(2) A provision that has been declared unconstitutional may not be enacted or implemented.  \par
Article 51 \par
(1) The Constitutional Council shall comprise 11 (eleven) members designated for a non-renewable term \par
of office of 9 (nine) years.  \par
These members shall be chosen from among personalities of established professional renown.  \par
They must be of high moral integrity and proven competence.  \par
(2) Members of the Constitutional Council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic. They shall \par
be designated as follows:  - three, including the President of the Council, by the President of the Republic;  \par
- three by the President of the National Assembly after consultation with the Bureau;  - three by the President of the Senate after consultation with the Bureau;  - two by the Higher Judicial Council.  \par
Besides the eleven members provided for above, former Presidents of the Republic shall be ex-officio \par
members of the Constitutional Council for life.  \par
In case of a tie, the President of the Constitutional Council shall have the casting vote.  \par
(3) In the event of the death or resignation of a member or any other cause of incapacity or inability duly \par
established by the competent bodies provided for by law, a replacement shall be designated by the \par
competent authority or body concerned and appointed. to complete the term of office.  \par
(4) Members of the Constitutional Council shall take the oath of office as laid down by law before \par
Parliament meeting in congress.  \par
(5) The duties of member of the Constitutional Council shall be incompatible with those of member of \par
Government, of member of Parliament or of the Supreme Court. Other incompatibilities and matters \par
relating to the status of members, namely obligations, immunities and privileges shall be laid down by \par
law.  \par
Article 52 \par
A law shall lay down the organization and functioning of the Constitutional Council, the conditions for \par
referring matters to it as well as the procedure applicable before it.  \par
PART VIII \par
The Court of Impeachment \par
Article 53 \par
(1) The Court of Impeachment shall have jurisdiction, in respect of acts committed in the exercise of their \par
functions, to try the President of the Republic for high treason and the Prime Minister, members of \par
Government and persons ranking as such and senior government officials to whom powers have been \par
delegated in pursuance of Articles 10 and 12 above, for conspiracy against the security of the State.  \par
(2) The organization, composition and the conditions under which matters shall be referred to it as well as \par
the procedure applicable before the Court of Impeachment shall be laid down by law.  \par
PART IX \par
The Economic and Social Council \par
Article 54 \par
There shall be an Economic and Social Council whose composition, duties and organization shall be laid \par
down by law.  \par
PART X \par
Regional and Local Authorities \par
Article 55 \par
(1) Regional and local authorities of the Republic shall comprise Regions and Councils.  \par
Any other such authority shall be created by law.  \par
(2) Regional and local authorities shall be public law corporate bodies. They shall have administrative and \par
financial autonomy in the management of regional and local interests. They shall be freely administered \par
by councils elected under conditions laid down by law.  \par
The duty of the councils of regional and local authorities shall be to promote the economic, social, health, \par
educational, cultural and sports development of the said authorities.  \par
(3) The State shall exercise supervisory powers over regional and local authorities, under conditions laid \par
down by law.  \par
(4) The State shall ensure the harmonious development of all the regional and local authorities on the \par
basis of national solidarity, regional potentials and inter-regional balance.  \par
(5) The organization, functioning and financial regulations of regional and local authorities shall be \par
defined by law.  \par
(6) The rules and regulations governing councils shall be defined by law.  \par
Article 56 \par
(1) The State shall transfer to Regions, under conditions laid down by law, jurisdiction in areas necessary \par
for their economic, social, health, educational, cultural and sports development.  \par
(2) The law shall define:  - the sharing of powers between the State and Regions in the areas of competence so transferred.  \par
(3) The resources of the Regions.  \par
(4) The land and property of each region.  \par
Article 57 \par
(1) The organs of the Region shall be the Regional Council and the President of the Regional Council.  \par
The Regional Council and the President of the Regional Council shall function within the framework of \par
powers transferred to the Region by the State.  \par
(2) The Regional Council shall be the deliberative organ of the Region. Regional Councillors whose term \par
of office shall be 5 (five) years shall comprise :  - divisional delegates elected by indirect universal suffrage;  - representatives of traditional rulers elected by their peers.  \par
The Regional Council shall reflect the various sociological components of the Region.  \par
The system of election, number, proportion by category, rules governing ineligibility, incompatibilities and \par
emoluments of Regional Councillors shall be laid down by law.  \par
(3) The Regional Council shall be headed by an indigene of the Region elected from among its members \par
for the life of the Council.  \par
The President of the Regional Council shall be the executive organ of the Region. In this capacity, he \par
shall be the interlocutor of the State representative. He shall be assisted by a Regional Bureau elected at \par
the same time as himself from among the members of the Council. The Regional Bureau shall reflect the \par
sociological components of the Region.  \par
(4) Members of Parliament of the Region shall sit in the Regional Council in an advisory capacity.  \par
Article 58 \par
(1) A delegate, appointed by the President of the Republic shall represent the State in the Region. In this \par
capacity, he shall be responsible for national interests, administrative control, ensuring compliance with \par
laws and regulations, as well as maintaining law and order. He shall, under the authority of the \par
Government, supervise and co-ordinate civil State services in the Region.  \par
(2) He shall exercise the supervisory authority of the State over the Region.  \par
Article 59 \par
(1) The Regional Council may be suspended by the President of the Republic where such organ:  - carries out activities contrary to the constitution;  - undermines the security of the State or public law and order;  - endangers the State's territorial integrity.  \par
The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by law.  \par
(2) The Regional Council may be dissolved by the President of the Republic, after consultation with the \par
Constitutional Council in all the cases provided for under paragraph (1) above.  \par
The other cases of dissolution shall be laid down by law.  \par
(3) The automatic replacement of the said organ by the State in the cases provided for under paragraphs \par
(1) and (2) above shall be decided by the President of the Republic.  \par
(4) The conditions of implementation of this article shall be determined by law.  \par
Article 60 \par
(1) The President and the Bureau of the Regional Council may be suspended by the President of the \par
Republic where such organs:  - carry out activities contrary to the Constitution;  - undermine the security of the State or public law and order;  \par
- endanger the State's territorial integrity.  \par
The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by law.  \par
(2) The President and the Bureau of the Regional Council may be dismissed by the President of the \par
Republic, after consultation with the Constitutional Council in all the cases provided for under paragraph \par
(1) above.  \par
The other cases of dismissal shall be laid down by law.  \par
(3) The automatic replacement of the said organ by the State in the cases provided for under paragraphs \par
(1) and (2) above shall be decided by the President of the Republic.  \par
(4) The conditions of implementation of this article shall be determined by law.  \par
Article 61 \par
(1) The following provinces shall become Regions:  - Adamaoua;  - Centre;  - East;  - Far North;  - Littoral;  - North.  - North-West;  - West;  - South;  - South-West.  \par
(2) The President of the Republic may, as and when necessary:  \par
a) change the names and modify the geographical boundaries of the Regions listed in paragraph (1) \par
above;  \par
b) create other Regions. In this case, he shall give them names and fix their geographical boundaries.  \par
Article 62 \par
(1) The aforementioned rules and regulations shall apply to all regions.  \par
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Part, the law may take into consideration the specificities of \par
certain Regions with regard to their organization and functioning.  \par
PART XI \par
Amendment of the Constitution \par
Article 63 \par
(1) Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed either by the President of the Republic or by \par
Parliament.  \par
(2) Any proposed amendment made by a member of Parliament shall be signed by at least one-third of \par
the members of either House.  \par
(3) Parliament shall meet in congress when called upon to examine a draft or proposed amendment. The \par
amendment shall be adopted by an absolute majority of the members of Parliament. The President of the \par
Republic may request a second reading; in which case the amendment shall be adopted by a two-third \par
Majority of the members of Parliament.  \par
(4) The President of the Republic may decide to submit any bill to amend the Constitution to -a \par
referendum; in which case the amendment shall be adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast.  \par
Article 64 \par
No procedure for the amendment of the Constitution affecting the republican form, unity and territorial \par
integrity of the State and the democratic principles which govern the Republic shall be accepted.  \par
PART XII \par
Special Provisions \par
Article 65 \par
The preamble shall be part and parcel of this Constitution.  \par
Article 66 \par
The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, Members of Government and persons ranking as such, \par
the President and Members of the Bureau of the National Assembly, the President and Members of the \par
bureau of the Senate, Members of Parliament, Senators, all holders of an elective office, Secretaries\par
General of Ministries and persons ranking as such, Directors of the Central Administration, General \par
Managers of public and semi-public enterprises, Judicial and Legal Officers, administrative personnel in \par
charge of the tax. base, collection and handling of public funds, all managers of public votes and property, \par
shall declare their assets and property at the beginning and at the end of their tenure of office.  \par
The other categories of persons to whom the provisions of this article shall apply and the conditions of \par
implementation thereof shall be determined by law.  \par
PART XIII \par
Transitional and Final Provisions \par
Article 67 \par
(1) The new institutions of the Republic provided for under this Constitution shall be set up progressively.  \par
(2) While the institutions are being set up and until such time that they are set up, the existing institutions \par
of the Republic shall remain in place and shall continue to function:  \par
a) The incumbent President of the Republic shall remain in office until the end of his current term, subject \par
to the implementation of the provisions of Article 6 (4) of this Constitution;  \par
b) The Members of Parliament of the National Assembly shall remain in office until the end of their current \par
term, subject to the implementation of the provisions of Article 8 (12) above.  \par
(3) The National Assembly shall exercise full legislative power and enjoy all Parliamentary prerogatives \par
until the Senate is set up.  \par
(4) The Supreme Court shall perform the duties of the Constitutional Council until the latter is set up.  \par
(5) The territorial organization of the State shall remain unchanged until the Regions are set up.  \par
Article 68 \par
The legislation applicable in the Federal State of Cameroon and in the Federated States on the date of \par
entry into force of this Constitution shall remain in force insofar as it is not repugnant to this Constitution, \par
and as long as it is not amended by subsequent laws and regulations.  \par
Article 69 \par
This law shall be registered and published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Cameroon in English \par
and French and implemented as the Constitution of the Republic of Cameroon.  \par
Yaounde, 18 January 1996. \par
Paul BIYA \par
President of the Republic\par
}
 